---
title: "Thoughts on reliability"
publishedAt: "2024-10-22"
summary: "Trade-offs and experiences "
---

It's intuitive that things fail and that you shouldn't be surprised when they
do. That's an ingrained experience in using any tool. When I swing a hammer, I
expect to miss. In my mind I chalk that mostly up to myself (I know that I
don't always swing the handle straight, and then head will miss by a centimeter
or two).

I don't typically blame the hammer for that, even though when you think about
it you definitely could. A heavy hammer for driving framing nails is a terrible
tool for driving picture frame finishing nails into your drywall and if you use
it, you'll probably end up with some angled nicks to the side. So right now
because I don't have a nice light finishing hammer, I am extra careful and slow
with the heavy hammer when putting up pictures and I even grip it higher up the
handle towards the head so that I have less leverage and less acceleration.

So users know the the tool doesn't always fit the job perfectly and habitually
modify their behavior to reduce their exposure to mistaken uses of the tool.

--

This idea doesn't just apply to hammers or physical tools. When I'm working
with software, for instance, I often anticipate glitches or unexpected
behaviors. Maybe a program freezes when handling large files, or an app drains
more battery than it should. Instead of getting frustrated every time, I've
started to adjust my expectations and habits—saving my work more frequently or
closing background applications to conserve resources.

It's not that I excuse the shortcomings of these tools, but I've come to accept
that imperfections are a part of almost any system. Rather than fighting
against them, I try to find ways to work with them. Sometimes that means taking
a few extra steps on my end; other times, it means acknowledging that I might
be using the wrong tool for the job altogether.

But there's a balance to strike here. While it's practical to adapt to a tool's
limitations, it's also important to recognize when those limitations hinder
more than help. If I'm spending more time compensating for a tool's flaws than
benefiting from its use, that's a sign it might be time to look for a better
solution.

In the end, reliability isn't just about how well a tool performs under ideal
conditions—it's about how we interact with it in the real world, with all its
variables and unpredictability. By being mindful of both the capabilities and
the limits of the tools at our disposal, we can make more informed choices and
set more realistic expectations.

It's a continual learning process. Every missed nail or crashed application is
an opportunity to understand not just the tool, but also how I use it. And
maybe, over time, I'll find that the tools don't fail me quite as often—or at
least, that I'm better prepared when they do.
